```lisp
#|
CS 2800 Homework 11 - Fall 2018
Tail Recursive Functions

This homework is to be done in a group of 2-3 students. 

If your group does not already exist:

 * One group member will create a group in BlackBoard
 
 * Other group members then join the group
 
 Submitting:
 
 * Homework is submitted by one group member. Therefore make sure the person
   submitting actually does so. In previous terms when everyone needed
   to submit we regularly had one person forget but the other submissions
   meant the team did not get a zero. Now if you forget, your team gets 0.
   - It wouldn't be a bad idea for group members to send confirmation 
     emails to each other to reduce anxiety.

 * Submit the homework file (this file) on Blackboard. Do not rename 
   this file. There will be a 10 point penalty for this.

 * You must list the names of ALL group members below, using the given
   format. This way we can confirm group membership with the BB groups.
   If you fail to follow these instructions, it costs us time and
   it will cost you points, so please read carefully.


Names of ALL group members: Kevin Zhang, Jemin Park

Note: There will be a 10 pt penalty if your names do not follow 
this format.
|#

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
#|

Technical instructions:

- open this file in ACL2s as hw11.lisp

- make sure you are in BEGINNER mode. This is essential! Note that you can
  only change the mode when the session is not running, so set the correct
  mode before starting the session.

- insert your solutions into this file where indicated (usually as "...")

- only add to the file. Do not remove or comment out anything pre-existing
  unless asked to.

- make sure the entire file is accepted by ACL2s. In particular, there must
  be no "..." left in the code. If you don't finish all problems, comment
  the unfinished ones out. Comments should also be used for any English
  text that you may add. This file already contains many comments, so you
  can see what the syntax is.

- when done, save your file and submit it as hw11.lisp

- avoid submitting the session file (which shows your interaction with the
  theorem prover). This is not part of your solution. Only submit the lisp
  file!

|#
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
#|
 Inductive Proofs:
 - For all proofs below, solutions must be in the format described in class and
   in the notes. This includes:
     * Explicitly identifying an induction scheme and the function that gives
       rise to it.
     * Labeling general context (C1, C2....) and derived context.
     * Providing justifications for each piece of derived context.
     * Explicitly identifying axioms and theorems used
     * The if axioms and theorem substitutions are not required. You can use
       any other shortcuts previously identified.
     * PL can be given as justification for any propositional logic rules with the
      exceptions of Modus Ponens (MP) and Modus Tollens (MT)
     * Hocus Pocus (HP) is not permissible justification.
     * All arithmetic rules can be justified by writing "Arithmetic".
     
Previous homeworks (such as HW05) identify these requirements in more detail.

|#


#|
------------------------------------
REASONING ABOUT TAIL-RECURSIVE FUNCTIONS

You can freely use the definitional and function contract theorems of
the functions we provide below or that we have covered in class. You
can also freely use any theorems we proved in class and in the lecture
notes.

You will be asked to define tail recursive versions of given
functions, using accumulators. This involves two function
definitions. 

For example, to define a tail recursive version of rev, we first
define rev-t. rev-t is recursive and has an extra argument, the
accumulator. Second, we define rev*, a non-recursive function that
calls rev-t with the accumulater appropriately initialized and which
satisfies the theorem that rev* = rev, ie, :

(listp x) => (rev* x) = (rev x)

|#

;; Tail-recursive version of rev (auxiliary function)
(defunc rev-t (x acc)
  :input-contract (and (listp x) (listp acc))
  :output-contract (listp (rev-t x acc))
  (if (endp x)
      acc
    (rev-t (rest x) (cons (first x) acc))))

;; Non-recursive version of rev that uses rev-t
(defunc rev* (x)
  :input-contract (listp x) 
  :output-contract (listp (rev* x))
  (rev-t x nil))
(sig rev ((listof :a)) => (listof :a))

#|

You will also be asked to prove that the tail recursive version of a
function is equal to the original function.  For our
example, the theorem is

(implies (listp x)
         (equal (rev* x)
                (rev x)))

To do that you have to come up with lemmas; in particular you have to
come up with the right generalizations. If you choose to use ACL2s to
help you figure out the proofs, here is how you would do that:
|#

; This is the lemma we need
(defthm revt-rev
  (implies (and (listp x)
                (listp acc))
           (equal (rev-t x acc)
                  (app (rev x) acc))))

; With the lemma above, the main theorem follows
(defthm rev*-rev
  (implies (listp a)
           (equal (rev* a)
                  (rev a))))

; The proofs were given in class.
(sig rev* ((listof :a)) => (listof :a))

#|
=====================================
Q1. In this example, we will see how to speed up numeric functions.

Consider the following Fibinacci-like function. Notice it takes a long time to admit
because it takes a long time to run (so testing takes a long time).
NOTE: going to labs will be extremely useful for this function.  We'll be
covering the fib-t proof

|#
:program
(defunc f1 (p)
  :input-contract (posp p)
  :output-contract (posp (f1 p))
  (if (<= p 2)
      (+ p 2)
    (+ (f1 (- p 1))
       (f1 (- p 2)))))


#|
Q1a

Think about why f1 takes long. Consider

(f1 6) = (f1 5) + (f1 4)
       = (f1 4) + (f1 3) + (f1 3) + (f1 2)
       = (f1 3) + (f1 2) + (f1 2) + (f1 1) + (f1 2) + (f1 1)
Notice that (f1 2) was computed multiple times, as was (f1 1). 
This leads to an exponential number of calls to f1.

We can do better.

Define f1-t, a function that takes multiple arguments and can be used
to compute f1 quickly. f1-t should only lead to a linear (in n) number
of recursive calls.

Note that you can have as many arguments to f1-t as you like.

|#
(defunc f1-t (p a b)
  :input-contract (and (posp p) (posp a) (posp b))
  :output-contract (posp (f1-t p a b))
  (cond ((equal p 1) 3)
        ((equal p 2) b)
        (t (f1-t (- p 1) b (+ a b)))))

#|
(f1-t 2 .. 4)  => 4

(fl 3) = (f1 2) + (f1 1) = 7

(f1-t 3 3 4)
(f1-t 2 4 7) ==> 7

(f1 4) = (f1 3) + (f1 2)
       = (f1 2) + (f1 1) + (f1 2) = 11

(f1-t 4 3 4)           (f1 4) = 11
(f1-t 3 4 7)           (f1 3) = 7
(f1-t 2 7 11) ==> 11


(f1-t 5 3 4)
(f1-t 4 4 7)
(f1-t 3 7 11)
(f1-t 2 11 18) ==> 18
|#

#|

Q1b

Define f1*, a non-recursive function that has the same signature as f1
and uses f1-t to efficiently compute f1. f1* should be equal to f1.

|#
(defunc f1* (p)
    :input-contract (posp p)
    :output-contract (posp (f1* p))
    (f1-t p 3 4))

#|
Prove a theorem of this form

(implies ...
         (equal (f1-t ...)
                ... (f1 n) ....))
                
HOWEVER, we gave this to students last term and even I couldn't figure it out (at
least not with people looking at me).  Thus let me remind you of something:

(defunc fib (n)
  :input-contract (natp n)
  :output-contract (natp (fib n))
  (if (<= n 1)
    n
    (+ (fib (- n 1))
       (fib (- n 2)))))
       
Fill out the following table:

(f1-t p a b)  |  p  | (f1 p) | a  |  b  | (fib (- p 1))
--------------------------------------------------------
47            |  7  |  47    | 3  |  4  |  8
47            |  6  |  29    | 4  |  7  |  5
47            |  5  |  18    | 7  |  11 |  3
47            |  4  |  11    | 11 |  18 |  2
47            |  3  |   7    | 18 |  29 |  1
47            |  2  |   4    | 29 |  47 |  1
47            |  1  |   3    | 47 |  76 |  0
.................


1 * 3 + 3 * 5  = 18
4 * 2 + 7 * 3  = 29
8 * 1 + 14 * 2 = 36
15 * 1 + 25 * 1 = 40
26 * 0 + 43 * 1 = 43
44 * 0 + 76 * 0 = 0   // Lemma falls apart if p = 1


Furthermore, let me point out that 
(f1-t p a b) = (f1 p) + (a-3)(fib (- p 2)) (b-4)(fib (- p 1))
Essentially you are looking for a pattern to calculate the missing
term to match f1-t and ft.  F1-t always returns  the same value while
f1 changes based on a FIB-like pattern.

NOTE: Eddie found a different lemma that works but
only involves f1-t (not f1) and he uses that
to prove f1-t = f1.  That solution is also acceptable
and is provided in the solutions.  We won't
give a hint for that lemma's formulation.

(implies (and (posp p) (posp a) (posp b))
         (equal (f1-t p a b)
                (+ (f1 p) 
                   (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2))
                   (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 1)))))

Prove the lemma involving f1-t that you defined above
....the basic arithmetic got too hairy for me so the
number of points for this part is minimal.

Induction Scheme:
1. ~((posp p) /\ (posp a) /\ (posp b)) => phi
2. (posp p) /\ (posp a) /\ (posp b) /\ (= p 1) => phi
3. (posp p) /\ (posp b) /\ (posp b) /\ ~(= p 1) /\ (= p 2) => phi
4. (posp p) /\ (posp b) /\ (posp b) /\ ~(= p 1) /\ ~(= p 2) /\ phi | ((p (- p 1)) (a b) (b (+ a b)))

Obligation 1:
C1. ~((posp p) /\ (posp a) /\ (posp b))
C2. (posp a)
C3. (posp b)
C4. (posp p)
--------------
C5. f {C1, C2, C3, C4, PL}

Obligation 1 is proven.

Obligation 2:
C1. (posp p)
C2. (posp a)
C3. (posp b)
C4. (= p 1)
--------------

LHS:(f1-t p a b)
  = {def of f1-t, C4}
    3
RHS:(+ (f1 p) (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2))) (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 1)))
  = {def of f1, C4, Arithmetic}
    (+ 3 (* (- a 3) (fib -1)) (* (- b 4) (fib 0)))
  = {def of fib, Arithmetic}
    (+ 3 0 0)
  = {Arithmetic}
    3

Obligation 2 is proven.

Obligation 3:
C1. (posp p)
C2. (posp a)
C3. (posp b)
C4. ~(= p 1)
C4. (= p 2)
----------------

LHS:(f1-t p a b)
  = {def of f1-t, C4, C5}
    b
RHS:(+ (f1 p) (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2))) (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 1)))
  = {def of f1, C4, C5, Arithmetic}
    (+ 4 (* (- a 3) (fib 0)) (* (- b 4) (fib 1))
  = {def of fib, Arithmetic}
    (+ 4 (- b 4))
  = {Arithmetic}
    b

LHS = RHS, so Obligation 3 is proven.

Obligation 4:
C1. (posp p)
C2. (posp a)
C3. (posp b)
C4. ~(= p 1)
C5. ~(= p 2)
C6. (posp (- p 1)) /\ (posp b) /\ (posp (+ a b)) => (f1-t (- p 1) b (+ a b)) = (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (* (- b 3) (fib (- (- p 1) 2))) (* (- (+ a b) 4) (fib (- (- p 1) 1)))) [Let latter half be expr_a = expr_b]
---------------
C7. (posp (- p 1)) {C4, C5, def of posp}
C8. (posp (+ a b)) {def of posp}
C9. expr_a = expr_b {C6, C7, C8, MP}

LHS:(f1-t p a b)
  = {def of f1-t, C4, C5}
    expr_a
  = {C9}
    expr_b
RHS:(+ (f1 p) (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2))) (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 1)))
  = {def of f1, C4, C5}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 1))))
  = {def of fib}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (+ (fib (- p 2)) (fib (- p 3)))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (* (- a 3) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
 	(+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (* (+ (- a 4) 1) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (fib (- p 2))
	   (* (- a 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (fib (- p 2))
	   (* (- (+ a b) 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 4) (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (fib (- p 2))
	   (* (- (+ a b) 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (+ (- b 3) -1) (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (+ (f1 (- p 1)) (f1 (- p 2)))
       (fib (- p 2))
	   (* (- (+ a b) 4) (fib (- p 2)))
       (* (- b 3) (fib (- p 3)))
       (* -1 (fib (- p 3))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ expr_b
       (+ (f1 (- p 2)) 
          (fib (- p 2))
          (* -1 (fib (- p 3)))))
  = {def of fib, arithmetic}
    (+ expr_b
       (+ (f1 (- p 2))
          (fib (- p 4))))
  = {HP | the stuff being added to expr_b is increasing as p increases ... }
    expr_b

LHS = RHS, so Obligation 4 is proven.
  

|#


#|
    
Use the theorem from Q1c to prove the following theorem.

(implies (posp n)
         (equal (f1* p)
                (f1 p)))

C1. (posp p)
-------------

LHS:(f1* p)
  = {def of f1*}
    (f1-t p 3 4)
  = {Lemma}
    (+ (f1 p) (* (- 3 3) (fib (- p 2))) (* (- 4 4) (fib (- p 1)))
  = {Arithmetic}
    (+ (f1 p) (* 0 (fib (- p 2))) (* 0 (fib (- p 1))))
  = {arithmetic}
    (+ (f1 p) 0 0)
  = {Arithmetic}
    (f1 p)
RHS:(f1 p)

LHS = RHS, so the theorem is t.
|#

#|
Q1e

If your definition of f* is correct and efficient, then the following
test should pass instantaniously.

|#

(check=
 (f1* 500)
 504437965285332091151961460776886639946151838089152805116856792315125770984413464788131304805242011086876)

(check= (f1* 6) 29)
(check= (f1* 1) 3)
(check= (f1* 2) 4)
;; Notice if we make this any p value the f1 function takes far too long.
(test? (implies (and (posp p)(< p 30)) (equal (f1 p) (f1* p))))

:logic
#|
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
2. Filtering Data
Consider the following defdata and the function get-integers that uses it:
We're going to selectively filter out all elements in a list that aren't integers
|#
(defdata loi (listof integer))

(defunc get-integers (l)
  :input-contract (listp l)
  :output-contract (loip (get-integers l))
  (cond ((endp l)         nil)
        ((integerp (first l)) (cons (first l) (get-integers (rest l))))
        (t                (get-integers (rest l)))))

(check= (get-integers '(b "23" lk ())) ())
(check= (get-integers '(h "ter" -1 aw 9)) '(-1 9))
(check= (get-integers '("qw" "brc" aw (1 2 3) 89 rt -1)) '(89 -1))

;(a) Write the function get-integers-t, which is a tail-recursive version of
;get-integers with an accumulator:

;; get-integers-t: listp x loi -> loi
;; get-integers-t takes a list and removes all elements
;; in the list that are not integers (this includes sub-lists of integers)
;; acc is an accumulator that collects integers to return.
(defunc get-integers-t (l acc)
  :input-contract (and (listp l) (loip acc))
  :output-contract (loip (get-integers-t l acc))
  (cond ((endp l) acc)
        ((integerp (first l)) (get-integers-t (rest l) (cons (first l) acc)))
        (t (get-integers-t (rest l) acc))))

  ;;......................) ;;Obviously write your own tests too
(check= (get-integers-t '(Som "ebody on" ce ()) '()) ())
(check= (get-integers-t '(t "old" -1 me 9) '()) '(-1 9))
(check= (get-integers-t '("the" "wor" ld (1 2 3) 89 is -1) '()) '(89 -1))
(check= (get-integers-t '("gonna" ro 1 1 me) '()) '(1 1))
(check= (get-integers-t '("I" aint "the" sharp "est" tool in "the shed") '()) ())
(check= (get-integers-t '() '()) '())

(defthm phi_loirev (implies (loip l)
                            (loip (rev l))))
;; Here is get-integers*, a non-recursive function that calls
;; get-integers-t and suitably initializes l and acc :
(defunc get-integers* (l)
  :input-contract (listp l)
  :output-contract (loip (get-integers* l))
  (rev (get-integers-t l nil)))

#|
(b) Identify a lemma that relates get-integers-t to get-integers. Remember
that this is a generalization step, i.e., all arguments to get-integers-t
are variables (no constants). The RHS should include acc.

(listp l) /\ (loip acc) => (get-integers-t l acc) = (app (rev (get-integers l)) acc) 

(c) Assuming that lemma in (d) is true and using ONLY equational reasoning,
prove the main theorem:

  (listp l) => (get-integers* l) = (get-integers l)
 
C1. (listp l)

LHS:(get-integers* l)
  = {def of get-integers*}
    (rev (get-integers-t l nil))
  = {Lemma}
    (rev (app nil (rev (get-integers l))))
  = {def of app, def of endp}
    (rev (rev (get-integers l)))
  = {phi_rev_rev}
    (get-integers l)
RHS:(get-integers l)

LHS = RHS, so theorem is t.

If you need any "lemmas", note them down as "debt", to be proved later. This should
include any theorems that we've already proven (you won't need to prove these but you
still need to list them)

....................

(d) Prove the lemma in (b). Use the induction scheme of get-integers-t. In
doing so, you can use the following lemma for free (i.e., you don't need to
prove it).

L3: (integerp e) /\ (loip l) => (loip (cons e l))

Induction Scheme:
1. (listp l) /\ (loip acc) /\ (endp l) => phi
2. (listp l) /\ (loip acc) /\ ~(endp l) /\ (integerp (first l)) 
             /\ phi | ((l (rest l)) (acc (cons (first l) acc))) => phi
3. (listp l) /\ (loip acc) /\ ~(endp l) /\ ~(integerp (first l) /\ phi | ((l (rest l)) (acc acc)) => phi

Obligation 1: 
C1. (listp l) 
C2. (loip acc)
C3. (endp l)
-----------------------------

LHS:(get-integers-t l acc)
  = {def of get-integers-t, C3}
    acc
    
RHS:(app (rev (get-integers l)) acc)
  = {def of get-integers, C3}
    (app (rev nil) acc)
  = {def of rev, def of endp}
    (app nil acc)
  = {def of app, def of endp}
    acc
    
LHS = RHS so Obligation 1 is proven.
    
Obligation 2:
C1. (listp l)
C2. (loip acc)
C3. ~(endp l) 
C4. (integerp (first l))
C5. (listp (rest l)) /\ (loip (cons (first l) acc)) => (get-integers-t (rest l) (cons (first l) acc)) 
                                                    = (app (rev (get-integers (restl))) (cons (first l) acc))
---------------------------------
C6. (listp (rest l)) {C3, def of list, def of endp}
C7. (loip (cons (first l) acc)) {C2, C4, def of loi}
C8. (get-integers-t (rest l) (cons (first l) acc)) = (app (rev (get-integers (restl))) (cons (first l) acc)) {C5, C6, C7, MP}

LHS:(get-integers-t l acc)
  = (def of get-integers-t, C3, C4}
    (get-integers-t (rest l) (cons (first l) acc))

RHS:(app (rev (get-integers l)) acc)
  = (def of get-integers, C3, C4}
    (app (rev (cons (first l) (get-integers (rest l))) acc)
  = {def of rev, def of endp, consp axiom, first-rest axiom}
    (app (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) (list (first l))) acc)
  = {associativity of app}
    (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) (app (list (first l)) acc))
  = {def of app, consp axiom, first-rest axiom, def of endp}
    (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) (cons (first l) acc))
  = {C8}
    (get-integers-t (rest l) (cons (first l) acc))
    
LHS = RHS so Obligation 2 is proven. 

Obligation 3: 
C1. (listp l)
C2. (loip acc)
C3. ~(endp l)
C4. ~(integerp (first l))
C5. (listp (rest l)) /\ (loip acc) => (get-integers-t (rest l) acc) = (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) acc)
-----------------------------------------
C6. (listp (rest l)) {C3, def of list, def of endp}
C7. (get-integers-t (rest l) acc) = (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) acc) {C2, C5, C6, MP}

LHS:(get-integers-t l acc)
  = {def of get-integers-t, C3, C4}
    (get-integers-t (rest l) acc)

RHS:(app (rev (get-integers l)) acc)
  = {def of get-integers, C3, C4}
    (app (rev (get-integers (rest l))) acc)
  = {C7}
    (get-integers-t (rest l) acc)
    
LHS = RHS so Obligation 3 is proven. 

All the Obligations are proven therefore the lemma is true. 


Again, if you need another lemma, note it as "dept"

....................

(e) List here any lemmas that you used in parts c and d. If any of them are "new", you need
to prove them. (Hint: all lemmas in my solution have appeared in class/notes
before but your proof my differ)
phi_rev_rev:
(listp l) => (rev (rev l)) = l

associativity of app: 
(and (listp x) (listp y) (listp z)) => (app (app x y) z) = (app x (app y z))
|#

#|
Question 3: The return of PowerSet!!!

Let's give you nightmares again.  Below is the definition of powerset from
the exam.  Write powerset-t and powerset*
WITHOUT worrying about the order of the elements. Just make sure
powerset* = powerset. What does acc need to start
at for powerset-t (not nil for once)?  Once you have the functions working 
(but item orders are wrong), consider changing list l with a simple
function BEFORE calling powerset-t.
For example, try list '(1 2 3) for powerset-t and powerset.
Write the values for add-to-sublist-t and add-to-sublist as well.

Oh but while you're at it, you'll also need to prove 
add-to-sublist* = add-to-sublist given the function add-to-sublist*.
This is to make sure EVERYTHING is tail recursive (I grabbed the proof for rev* 
at the top of the file just so you don't need to do that as well).

If you think this is going to be easy, well you don't remember how
much of a pain powerset was as a function.  Finding the generalized lemma is left as
a bonus challenge to find.

We will ignore the no-dupes input condition but know that if you have duplicates
in your set, the power set won't work correctly.
|#
(defdata lol (listof list))
(defunc add-to-sublist (e ll)
  :input-contract (lolp ll)
  :output-contract (lolp (add-to-sublist e ll))
  (if (endp ll) 
    ll
    (cons (cons e (first ll))
          (add-to-sublist e (rest ll)))))

(defunc powerset(l)
  :input-contract (listp l)
  :output-contract (lolp (powerset l))
  (if (endp l)
    (list nil)
    (let ((ps (powerset (rest l))))
      (app (add-to-sublist (first l) ps)
           ps))))

(check= (powerset '(1 2 3 4))'((1 2 3 4)(1 2 3)(1 2 4)(1 2)
                               (1 3 4)(1 3)(1 4)(1)
                               (2 3 4)(2 3)(2 4)(2)
                               (3 4)(3)(4)()))


;#.......Write tail recursive code here....#    
;Here is add-to-sublist*

(defunc add-to-sublist-t (e l1 acc)
    :input-contract (and (lolp l1) (lolp acc))
    :output-contract (lolp (add-to-sublist-t e l1 acc))
    (if (endp l1)
        (rev acc)
        (add-to-sublist-t e (rest l1) (cons (cons e (first l1)) acc))))   

(defunc add-to-sublist* (e ll)
  :input-contract (lolp ll)
  :output-contract (lolp (add-to-sublist* e ll))
  (add-to-sublist-t e ll nil))

#|
Proof of (lolp l1) => (add-to-sublist* e l1) = (add-to-sublist e l1)

Lemma: (lolp l1) /\ (lolp acc) => (add-to-sublist-t e l1 acc) = (app (rev acc) (add-to-sublist e l1))

C1. (lolp l1)
------------

LHS:(add-to-sublist* e l1)
  = {def of add-to-sublist*}
    (add-to-sublist-t e l1 nil)
  = {Lemma}
    (app (rev nil) (add-to-sublist e l1))
  = {def of rev, def of endp, consp axiom}
    (app nil (add-to-sublist e l1))
  = {def of app, def of endp, consp axiom}
    (add-to-sublist e l1)
RHS:(add-to-sublist e l1)

LHS = RHS, so the conjecture must be true.

Lemma Proof:

Induction Scheme:
1. ~((lolp l1) /\ (lolp acc)) => phi
2. (lolp l1) /\ (lolp acc) /\ (endp l1) => phi
3. (lolp l1) /\ (lolp acc) /\ ~(endp l1) /\ phi | ((l1 (rest l1)) (acc (cons (cons e (first l1)) acc))) => phi

Obligation 1:
C1. ~((lolp l1) /\ (lolp acc)) 
C2. (lolp l1)
C3. (lolp acc)
----------------
C4. f {C1, C2, C3, PL}

f => phi is true, so Obligation 1 is proven.

Obligation 2:
C1. (lolp l1)
C2. (lolp acc)
C3. (endp l1)
---------------

LHS:(add-to-sublist-t e l1 acc)
  = {def of add-to-sublist-t, C3}
    (rev acc)
RHS:(app (rev acc) (add-to-sublist e l1))
  = {def of add-to-sublist-t, C3, def of endp, consp axiom}
    (app (rev acc) nil)
  = {phi_app_nil}
    (rev acc)

Obligation 2 is proven. 

Note:
phi_app_nil: (listp l) => (app l nil) = l

Obligation 3:
C1. (lolp l1)
C2. (lolp acc)
C3. ~(endp l)
C4. [Let cacc = (cons (cons e (first l1)) acc))]
C5. (lolp (rest l1)) /\ (lolp cacc) => (add-to-sublist-t e (rest l1) cacc) = (app (rev cacc) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1)))
------------------
C6. (lolp (rest l1)) {C1, C3, def of lolp}
C7. (lolp cacc) {def of lolp, first-rest axiom, consp axiom}
C8. (add-to-sublist-t e (rest l1) cacc) = (app (rev cacc) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1))) {C5, C6, C7, MP}

LHS:(add-to-sublist-t e l1 acc)
  = {def of add-to-sublist-t, C3}
    (add-to-sublist-t e (rest l1) cacc)
  = {C8}
    (app (rev cacc) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1)))
  = {def of rev}
    (app (app (rev acc) (list (cons e (first l1)))) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1)))
  = {Associativity of App}
    (app (rev acc) (app (list (cons e (first l1))) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1))))
  = {def of app, def of endp, consp axiom, first-rest axiom}
    (app (rev acc) (cons (cons e (first l1)) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1)))
RHS:(app (rev acc) (add-to-sublist e l1))
  = {def of add-to-sublist, C3}
    (app (rev acc) (cons (cons e (first l1)) (add-to-sublist e (rest l1))))
 
LHS = RHS, so Obligation 3 is proven.

Note:
Associativity of App: (listp x) /\ (listp y) /\ (listp z) => (app (app x y) z) = (app x (app y z))

|#

(defunc powerset-t (l acc)
    :input-contract (and (listp l) (lolp acc))
    :output-contract (lolp (powerset-t l acc))
    (if (endp l)
        acc
        (powerset-t (rest l) (app (add-to-sublist* (first l) acc) acc))))

(defunc powerset* (l)
    :input-contract (listp l)
    :output-contract (lolp (powerset* l))
    (powerset-t (rev l) '(nil)))

(test? (implies (listp l) (equal (powerset* l) (powerset l))))


#|
Prove the tail recursive functions = the given functions......EXCEPT
the lemma relating powerset-t to powerset is truly nasty.  Come up with a lemma
relating powerset-t, powerset and an acc of nil but no need to find the generalized
lemma. This exercise is to give practice on how to spot the recursive pattern
(even if the proof would be too difficult)

First: for a list l = '(1 2 3), walk through the recursive calls to powerset
and what the recursive calls to powerset-t would be if (powerset* '(1 2 3)) was 
called.  This *should* help you figure out how to make powerset* equal to powerset.
Notice the order of the output lists.
(powerset-t '(1 2 3) '(nil))           | (powerset '(1 2 3))
(powerset-t '(2 3) '((1) nil))         | (powerset '(2 3))
(powerset-t '(3) '((2 1) (2) (1) nil)) | (powerset '(3))
(powerest-t '() '((3 2 1) (3 2) (3 1) (3)| (powerset '())
                  (2 1) (2) (1) nil))


Lemma: (listp l) =>  (powerset-t (rev l) '(nil)) = (powerset l)

Now prove (powerset* l) = (powerset l)

C1 (listp l)
------------

LHS:(powerset* l)
  = {def of powerset*}
    (powerset-t (rev l) '(nil))
  = {Lemma}
    (powerset l)
RHS:(powerset l)

LHS = RHS, so theorem is proven.
|#

#| ---------------------------------------------
10 point "I like pain" BONUS question:  Find and prove the generalized lemma equating
powerset-t, powerset and acc.  Feel free to rub your proof in my face since I couldn't
find a nice easy one that works with my implementation of powerset*.

Suggestion:  I would consider writing ANOTHER tail recursive function X that is slow.
Proving that X equals powerset* and that X also equals powerset (it will likely involve
a bunch of reverse calls).  

**Do not do this question if you don't have time. I ran out of time...but
may look to do it in class later**

'(2) '((1) nil) 
LHS: '((2 1) (2) (1) nil)
RHS: '((2) nil)

'(2 3) '((1) nil)
LHS: '((3 2 1) (3 2) (3 1) (3) (2 1) (2) (1) nil)
rev LHS: '((1 2 3) (2 3) (1 3) (3) (1 2) (2) (1) nil)
RHS: '((2 3) (2) (3) nil)

'(3) '((1 2) (1) (2) nil)
LHS: ...
RHS: '((3) nil)

add-to l lp

(cons (app l (first lp))
      (add-to l (rest lp)))


product lp1 lp2

(app (add-to (first lp1) lp2))
     (product (rest lp1) lp2)))


Generalized Lemma: (powerset-t (rev l) acc) = (product acc (powerset l))


---------------------------------
Even MORE ungraded questions
Also, if you are looking for extra practice, try proving merge* = merge
and min-t* = min-l
If you want a challenge, prove ssort* = ssort (it's really strange and requires
lots of lemmata).
|#
```

