## 02-02-2017 | Aim: Documenting Your Data

##### Do Now: What are some drawbacks to using an SQL database?

- There can be a lot of empty columns if they're not required filling 
- Impossible to dynamically edit the schema 
- Can't sort into the database
- Issues when trying to relate large tables 

##### NoSQL

- Graph-based databases
- Map-based 
- Document-based ( MongoDB )

#### Document-oriented Database

- Records in Document-Oriented DBs are stores as documents.
- Each document contains all the data that is associated with the given record, in key-value pairs ( fields )
- Documents in the same collection do not need to have the same fields
- Documents that are meant to be stored together are put into collections. 
- You do not need to specify the type of data put into each field
- Fields can contain many different kinds of data, including lists and other documents.
- Each document has its own primary key, usually generated by mongo
- Looks similar to json and Python dict.
- There are various types that can be stored in a document ( Ex. Date )

##### Mongo in Python

```PYthon
from pymongo import MongoClient
client = MongoClient('127.0.0.1')
database = client['foo']
database = client.foo 
coll = database.collection1
coll['doc1']
```

## 02-03-2017 | Aim: Mongo Likes Py

### PyMongo

- ``from pymongo import MongoClient`` 

- Connecting to a mongodb server and database 

  - server = MongoClient( <IP> )

  - ```python
    from pymongo import MongoClient
    server = MongoClient('149.89.150.100') # At home, use the looopback
    ```

- To access databases, collections and documents, you can use either [] or . 

  - db  = server['mydb']

  - db = server.mydb

  - c = db['students'] 

  - ```python
    db = server.mydb
    col = db.students
    ```

- Databases and collections are not created until a document has been added to them!

- To add a document

  1. Create a dictionary

  2. Insert it into the collection

     - ```python
       doc = { 'name' : 'kevin', 'age' : 25}
       col.insert_one( doc )
       ```

## 02-06-2017 | Aim: Where'd mongo put that data?

### Mongodb

- Retrieving data from Mongodb

  - *.find()* 
    - Collection method that returns a cursor object that can be used to iterate through all the documents in a collection 
  - *.find_one()*
    - Collection method that returns a single document as a dictionary 

- Querying a Mongodb

  - *.find()* and *.find_one()* can take an argument to narrow the resulting content.

  - Queries in pymongo are formatted as documents

    - foo.find( { 'age' : 25 } )

  - Search criteria can be modified using ```'$and'```, ```'$or'```, and ```'$not'```

    - ```python 
      foo.find_one( { '$and' : [ 
      					  { 'name' : 'bob' } 
      					  { 'age' : 25 }
      					 ] } )
      ```

  - Other operators:

    - ```'$gt'``` - Greater than
    - ```'$gte'``` - Greater than or equal to
    - ```'$lt'``` - Less than
    - ```'$lte'``` - Less than or equal to 
    - ```'$ne'``` - Not equal to 

## 02-08-2017 | aIM: up**DAT(A)**ing mongo

#### Modifying Data

- *.delete_one( <QUERY> )*

  - Deletes the first document that matches the query

- *.delete_many( <QUERY> )*

  - Deletes all the documents that match the query

- *.update ( <QUERY>, <OPERATION> )*

  - updates a document that matches the query

  - Operation is a document that matches an update operation:

    - ```'$set'``` - Change the value of a field. 
    - ```'$unset'``` - Remove a field
    - ```'$inc'``` - Increment the value of a field

  - Example:

    - ```
      col.update( {'id' : '4'}, {'$set' : {'name' : 'francis' } } )
      ```

## 02-13-2017 | CANVASING tHE aREA

### HTML5

- redesign of HTML with a focus on making the more "modern" features of web browsers easy to work with.
- Designed around javascript and a standardized DOM
- Includes built-in support for audio and video playback.

#### Canvas

- HTML5 element that provides a drawing area.

- Javascript functions can draw onto a canvas element.

  - You must declare what context you are drawing in
    - For example: 2D drawing, 3D drawing, raw bitmap render

- ```HTML
  <!DOCTYPE html>
  <html>
    <h1>Canvas Fun!</h1>
    <canvas width="500px" height="500px" id="slate">
    	
    </canvas>
    
  </html>
  ```

  ```javascript
  var c = document.getElementById("slate");
  var ctx = c.getContext('2d');
  ctx.fillStyle = "#ffff00";
  ctx.fillRect(50, 50, 100, 200); // x0, y0, w, h
  ctx.clearRect( ... ) //to clear image
  ```

## 02-14-2017 | Aim: Your path to success start here!

### Javascript Paths

- Paths are used to draw arbitrary shapes, including circles and curves
- A context can keep track of one path at a time. 
- The path is not drawn until stroke() is called
- A path is considered done when a new ```beginPath()``` is called
- ```beginPath()``` 
  - Starts or resets the current path
- ```moveTo( X, Y )```
  - Moves the path to position (x,y), does not result in a line or a filled-in section
- ```lineTo( X, Y )```
  - Moves the path to position (x,y), which will result in a line and a filled-in section

## 02-16-2017 | Aim: Let's Get Animated

### Animation in JS

- We will be using ```requestAnimationFrame``` instead of ```setInterval``` 
  - ```requestAnimationFrame``` tells the browser to run a specified function before drawing the next frame
  - The browser will attempt to run ~60 frames per second 
  - It lets the browser handle when the code should be executed (as opposed to ```setInterval```, which is based on specific times)
  - It also lets the browser pause animation when a page is not in the foreground
- ```window.requestAnimationFrame( <FUNCTION> )```
- ```window.removeAnimationFrame( )```

## 02-27-2017 | Aim: What's your vector victor?

### XML

-  e**X**tensible **M**arkup **L**anguage
-  It is not a formatting language ( like HTML )
-  A framework for creating markup-based grammars
-  Uses some of the syntactic standards of HTML, like tags and attributes, with a focus on storing and representing data instead of rendering and displaying it.
-  An XML name-space is defined by the tags and attributes associated with a specific XML language.

### SVG

- Scalable Vector Graphics

- SVG is a specific XML-based vector graphics format. 

- Vector Graphics are images that are not reresented as a 2d grid of pixels ( raster ) but instead as a list of drawing commands ( like line, circle, rectangle, curve, ... )

- The ```<svg>``` element is designed to store SVG code ( that is, SVG XML elements )

  ```html
  <svg xmlns="https://www.w3.org/2000/svg">
  	SVG CODE HERE
  </svg>
  ```

  - **xmlns** : Attribute that identifies the namespace for the specific XML language being used

- ```HTML
  <svg id="vimage" xmlns="https://www.w3.org/2000/svg" height="500" width="500">
  	<circle cx="250" cy="250" r="83" fill="yellow" stroke="blue"/>
  </svg>
  ```

- ```Javascript
  var rect = document.createElementNS( "https://www.w3.org/2000/svg", "rect" )
  ```


## 02-28-2017 | Aim: Vector-ize me

### SVG & Javascript

- Creating SVG elements in javascript

  - ```document.createElementNS( <NAMESPACE>, <ELEMENT> );``` - Creates an element from a specified XML Namespace

  - ```javascript
    var c1 = document.createElementNS( "https://www.w3.org/2000/svg", "circle");
    ```

- Once created, you can modify it with ```setAttribute``` calls

  - ```javascript
    c1.setAttribute("cx", "0");
    c1.setAttribute("cy", "0");
    c1.setAttribute("fill", "green");
    c1.setAttribute("r", "50");
    ```

- To add the element to the svg, you can use ```appendChild``` calls

  - ```javascript
    document.getElementById("vimage").appendChild( c1 );
    ```


## 03-06-2017 | Aim: Capturing bubbles

### Javascript Event Propagation

- Events initially propagate downward from the top most node in the DOM tree to the target element. This is known as **event capturing**

- After an event reaches its target, it then propagates back up the DOM tree. This is known as **event bubbling**

- By default, event listeners do not trigger until the event bubbling phase

- Triggering events at the capture phase can be done by adding <true> as a third argument to ```addEventListener()```

  - ```javascript
    x.addEventListener( "click", foo, true )
    ```

- You can cancel event propagation with ```e.stopPropagation();```


## 03-07-2017 | Aim: It's like this and like that and like this...

### Event Propagation

1. An element intercepts an event
2. Browser collects DOM node path of the event from the starting element to the root.
3. **Capture**: The event propagates down the path from Step 2
4. **Bubble**: The event propagates up the path from Step 2

```javascript
e.target
```

## 03-13-2017 | Aim: r3d3?

### d3.js

- javascript framework designed for working with data

- #### The Basics

  - Include ``http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js`` in a script tag to use d3, or download the source and link that instead

  - ##### Selectors

    - Like jquery, you can select DOM elements using d3 functions
    - ``d3.select( <IDENTIFIER> );``
      - Returns the first element that matches the given identifier
    - ``d3.selectAll( <IDENTIFIER> );``
      - Returns an array of all the elements that match the given identifier

  - After selecting an element, you can set various attributes, like style, text, listeners...

    - ``d3.select("body").style("color", "red")`` 

  - But you can also pass functions to set values dynamically

    - ```javascript
      d3.selectAll("p").style("font-size", function(){ 
        Math.floor( Math.random * 20 ) + "px"  
      });
      ```

  - ##### Binding Data

    - You can bind data to elements in d3 using the .data method

      - ```javascript
        var info = [23, 45, 10, 12]
        d3.selectAll("p").data(info)
        ```

    - Many of the methods that can use anonymous functions allow for parameters to those functions. The first parameter represents an item in the bound area, and the second represents the index of the item in the data set.

    - ```javascript
      d3.selectAll("p")
      	.style("font-size",
      			function(d){
                    return d + "px"})
          .text(function(d),i){
            		return i;
          }
      ```

- ``.transition()`` and ``.duration(<milliseconds>)`` for animations in d3


## 04/14/2017 | Aim: Lists, comprendo?

### List Comprehensions

- Programming construct for building lists out of existing lists

- **Basic Syntax**

  - ``[ <value> for <var> in <list> ]`` 

  - Making a list of perfect squares

    - ```python
      [ x * x for x in range(10)]
      >>> [ 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81 ]
      ```

  - Can also include other objects within the list

    - ```python
      [(x, x * x) for x in range(10)] ## Tuples
      >>> [ (1,1), (2,4), (3,9), ... (9,81) ]
      ```

- **Conditional Comprehensions**

  - ``[ <value> for <var> in <list> if <condition> ]``

  - ```python
    [ x * x for x in range(10) if x % 2 == 0 ]
    >>> [0, 4, 16, 36, 64]
    ```

- Ternary Operator

  - Java/C : `` x = x>255 ? 255 : x``
  - Python : ``255 if x > 255 else x`` 

- **Using the Ternary in List Comprehensions** 

  - ```python
    [ i * i if i % 2 == 0 else 0 for i in range(10) ]
    >>> [0, 0, 4, 0, 16, 0, 36, 0, 64, 0]
    ```



## 04-25-2017 | Aim: Let's get some closure (not Clojure)

### Closures

1. A function is declared inside another function
2. The inner function accesses a variable form the outer function (outside of the local scope of the inner function)
3. The external function binds a value to the variable and finishes (or closes) before the inner function can be completed

- ```python
  def repeat( s ):
      def times( x ):
          return s * x
      return times
  ```

- A closure is completed when its variables are bound to values

- ```python
  f = repeat('hello')
  #s is bound to 'hello' 
  f(3)
  #x is bound to 3, function outputs 'hellohellohello'
  ```

- lambda expressions

  - Anonymous functions can be created using lambda

  - ``lambda <arguments> : <definition>``

  - ```python
    def repeat(s):
        return lambda x: x * s
    ```

- Decorator is for applying a closure

  - ```python
    def heading(f):
    	def inner():
    		return '<h1>' + str( f() ) + '</h1>'
        return inner

    import random 

    @heading #This closes greet with heading
    def greet():
        greetings = ['Hello', 'Welcome', 'Ni Hao']
        return random.choice( greetings ) 
    ```

```python
def quicksort( l ):
    if len( l ) <= 1:
        return l
    pivot = random.choice( l )
    lower = [ a for a in l if a < pivot ]
    upper = [ a for a in l if a > pivot ]
    return quicksort( lower ) + ( [ pivot ]* l.count( pivot ) ) + quicksort( upper )
```

## 05-01-2017 | Aim: Functional Programming

### Functional Programming

- **Toolbox**: Memoization, Map, Filter, Reduce

- Memoization

  - Reduce the time it takes to complete a (recursive) algorithm by saving previously computed values to be used later

  - Can be easily created using decorators

  - ```python
    def memoize(f):
        vals = {}
        def inner(*arg):
            if arg[0] not in vals:
                vals[arg[0]] = f(*arg)
            return vals[arg[0]]
        return inner
    ```

- Map/Filter/Reduce

  - The holy trinity of list processing

  - Reduce
    - Computer some value based on a list (ie reducing the list to a single value)

    - reduce(<function>, <list>)

    - the function argument must take 2 parameters

    - ```python
      def add(a, b):
          return a + b

      >>> L = range(10)
      >>> reduce( add, L )
      ```

  - Map

    - Create a new list by applying a function to all elements of an existing list
    - map(<function>, <list>)

  - Filter

    - Create a new list by applying a boolean condition to all elements of list
    - filter(<function>, <list>)

  - ​